why is your skeleton different from a
snail's shell
why is it so difficult to improve on a
rock climbing personal best
and how do you get a rowing boat to move
in a straight line
the answer to all of these questions is
optimization
optimization is a concept that means
getting as close to a goal as possible
given certain constraints maths is
helpful for this because it allows us to
avoid the slow and painful process of
trial and error
when we can instead use calculus to
quickly identify the best strategy
possible
so what are the commonalities we see
across optimization scenarios
well we need a goal first of all and
constraints that determine a number of
different possible strategies that can
get us some way towards that goal
while the calculus specific to different
optimization scenarios can get very
specific and complex
the concept itself can be applied to
many fields
i'm going to take you through some
applications of optimization
in evolutionary biology climbing and
rowing
let's get started
living things like you and me exist
because of organization
but this needs a lot of energy to
maintain this is where optimization
comes in
how do you make a body that needs the
least energy but still does a lot of
functions
we're going to focus on a body part
common to both of us and most animals
the skeleton
first we'll look at the diversity of
skeletons across different habitats
and then the individual adaptations of
some skeletons skeleton diversity
is very desirable for animal evolution
this is because
any variation will allow different
species to adapt to new habitats and
situations
meaning that individuals of each species
can survive long enough to reproduce and
pass on their genes
we can therefore define our optimization
goal as the maximum number of skeleton
types
possible within the group we call
animals now you might think that the
number of possible skeleton types and
combinations could go on forever
but surprisingly it is finite this is
because of constraints like the
availability of materials to build
skeletons
physical limitations like atmospheric
pressure and the incompatibility of some
skeleton types
the different strategies in this case
are the different components that can be
combined to make up a skeleton
it can be hard to group skeleton types
together since animals look so different
from each other
but let's have a go our skeleton is
mostly made of bone and cartilage cells
but other types of skeletons use
different materials
let's take a look at this insect it has
a hard skeleton like us
but on the outside of the body and not
made of cells
instead cells inside the insect make
different molecules like chitin
which provide functions similar to that
of living bone
similarly animals like snails have cells
that make calcium carbonate into a hard
shell
one big difference between the skeletons
of insects and snails
is the way that they grow human bone has
cells that can grow
and change shape but a skeleton without
living cells can't
limiting the growth of the soft body and
meaning different solutions are needed
in the insect the external skeleton is
molted or shed periodically as the
animal grows
you can think of how snakes shed their
skin while the snail shell is grown only
at the edges in a spiral pattern so that
it doesn't grow right into the body
itself
another animal that you probably have
never thought of having a skeleton is an
earthworm
there are no hard parts in the skeleton
so internal pressure comes instead from
water
stored in special sections within the
worms body the incompressibility of
water
means the sections can change shape but
not volume creating resistance for the
muscles of the worm to push against
this is called a hydrostatic skeleton
the many different types of skeleton
have been summarized by researchers
thomas and rife in this skeleton space
there are seven key categories of
skeleton element in the skeleton space
such as its growth process and each of
these
contain two to four options such as
adding units
growing at the edges or molting this
makes the skeleton space
seven dimensional with 1536 possible
combinations of options
however analysis of the space is
generally simplified into two dimensions
that is only looking at two options in
combination instead of seven
this brings the number of skeleton types
down rapidly to 186
we can also rule out eight pairs of
elements that are incompatible
you can't have an internal skeleton that
is also molted
now if these are theoretically the
finite amount of skeleton options
available for animals to evolve over
time
how many types have actually been seen
in nature the answer is gratifying
very nearly all of them but this
diversity changes between different
habitats
because these will have different sets
of constraints let's look at some cases
where the constraints are pretty
non-variable
comparing the sea the land and the air
out of all of these the diversity of
animal skeletons is greatest among those
that live in the sea
and smallest in animals capable of long
flight
this is because there are additional
constraints in the air that don't apply
to land
any flying skeleton would have to be
light and have some sort of wing
this is not so problematic on the ground
where we see heavy boned vertebrates
alongside light flightless insects
in the sea even more options are
available as the buoyancy provided by
water removes the need for the skeleton
to withstand gravity
in summary the optimum number of
skeleton types is determined by a
combination of absolute constraints
that become more specific if you narrow
down the group of animals that you're
talking about
within these groups each individual
species will have a skeleton uniquely
optimized to the constraints of its
environment
prioritizing certain functions over
conflicting ones
in the case of humans our own hard bones
act like levers controlled by muscles
optimized for fast movement but not for
external protection as we have
behavioral adaptations to avoid danger
instead
optimization is also apparent in many
sports
such as my personal favorite of climbing
generally the way that you climb really
depends on your body type
a tall person will be able to easily
reach what a short person might have to
jump to
and a heavily muscled person can pull
themselves up quickly while someone
lighter could hold themselves on the
wall for longer
however there are narrower constraints
in a more recent climate category called
speed climbing
which is destined for inclusion in the
next olympics
as we can tell from the name the goal of
speed climbing is to get as quickly as
possible to the top of a 15 meter
wall faster than anyone else in the
competition
the difference between this and normal
competitive climbing is that the
climbers know exactly what the route is
going to be beforehand
and will have trained on identical ones
the speed climbing wall is built exactly
the same
no matter where you try it with a five
degree angle of overhang
identical color and roughness and
identical placement of identical holds
now we can easily tell by viewing the
wall as a rectangle that the quicker
street to the top is a straight line
upwards
because this eliminates any extra time
taken moving to either side
however this optimum is hard to achieve
in practice because of where the holes
are positioned
forcing sideways movement the straight
line makes sense
when we model the body as a particle
with its mass concentrated into a single
point
but the human body is much larger than a
particle and has limbs of different
lengths so its mass is not
evenly spread instead we model climbers
using their approximate center of mass
the point around which body mass is
evenly distributed
this will vary between athletes as
people with bigger legs will have a
lower center of mass than those with
bigger shoulders
speed climbers therefore optimize their
strategy by keeping their center of mass
as close to the central line as possible
maximizing their upwards momentum this
results in new moves like the reza
while normally the starting strategy
involves swinging out to the left to
reach the fourth hold
iranian climber reza aleppo managed to
completely bypass it in 2017
keeping his trajectory on a straighter
path helped him set a world record of
5.48 seconds
the record for speed climbing is
becoming tougher as more climbers
attempt it
but we can expect future breakthroughs
to involve similar ways of optimizing
for a straight line upwards
a dearest sport to the oxford heart that
also involves
optimizing by traveling in straight
lines is rowing
there are many different types of rowing
boat they can have one to eight rowers
they might have a cox who sits in the
front and steers the boat
and they could be sweep stroke or
sculling stroke the last point is
important because it affects the balance
of the boat
the oars of skulling boats are placed or
rigged symmetrically
while in sweep stroke there is a much
greater distance between ores on
alternate sides
this creates wiggle where the different
forces on the boat cause it to
constantly drift slightly to one side
so how do you optimize the rigging of a
boat to eliminate wiggle
well let's set up our constant
constraints and our variables
in a boat with no added weight from a
cox with four
ores and a set distance between each all
and assuming the rowers all have similar
capabilities
what you can still change is the
arrangement of ores
the conventional rigging arrangement is
alternating left and right
sides or bow and stroke if you want to
be fancy
but this doesn't mean it's the best way
we want to keep the boat balanced with
the same number of ores on each side but
we could still change
or arrangement to left left right right
or
left right right left the movement of
each ore in a single stroke can be
resolved into two directions of force
one in the direction opposite to
forward's travel and another
perpendicular to this which we can call
the transverse force
the former force stays in the same
direction throughout the stroke
while the latter transverse force
changes from facing away to facing
towards the boat
and this change is the basis of wiggle
now you can counteract wiggle using
steering or the row is shifting their
balance in the boat
but the preferred strategy is optimizing
the rigging to prevent wiggle from
happening in the first place
so no energy is needed to counteract it
calculating the total turning forces or
moments on the boat created by each ore
arrangement
tells us that wiggle is greatest in the
left left right right arrangement
but the optimal arrangement is not the
normal one it's instead
left right right left the benefits of
this rig were discovered in the late 50s
by an italian crew who went on to win a
gold medal in the 1956 olympics
once a simple optimization model has
been created for this idealized
situation
it can be manipulated to include
different numbers of rowers and the
possibility of having different numbers
of oars on each side
idealized situations may be removed from
real-life ones
but as seen here they can also lead to
olympic gold
in this video we've discussed three
fairly different examples of
optimization in real world applications
but there are countless others in many
different industries hopefully you've
now left behind the idea that
optimization
only relates to stuffy formula and
abstract boxes in reality it could be as
dynamic as a movement we've seen it
describe
another lesson we can take from this is
the importance of collaboration with
mathematicians in biology sport
science engineering and many more fields
optimization problems can be found
everywhere
just set a goal determine your options
and start asking questions
you